OK, hi, everyone. I'll be getting started. OK, so it's Tuesday of week two. So hopefully, that means everyone has done the assignment one. Everyone done assignment one? If I'm saying this, I'm probably saying it to the wrong people, but it seems like every year, some people blow some of their late days on assignment one, and it's really just the wrong place to use them. So yeah, hopefully, you've all done assignment one and did not-- this is meant to be the easy on-ramp, and then we go straight on from that, so that out today, we have assignment two. So assignment two has two purposes. Purpose one is to make you do some math, some understanding of what neural networks really compute and how they compute it. And that's what I'm going to talk about today, is also going through that math. But then simultaneously-- maybe it does three things in assignment two. So we're going to be learning something about dependency parsing, which will be, actually, something about language structure and linguistics. But then thirdly, for assignment two, we're going to start using PyTorch. So PyTorch is one of the leading software frameworks for deep learning and the one that we're going to use for this class. So for-- I mean, the assignment three PyTorch is exceedingly scaffolded, so it's sort of, here's this thing, and you have to write these two lines, use these two functions. But nevertheless, for help people get up to speed and get started using PyTorch on Friday at 3:30 in gates B01 or it'll also, again, be recorded. We have a tutorial on PyTorch, and so that's a great way to get more of a sense of PyTorch and how it works before doing assignment two. Yeah, the other things-- yeah, so for nearly all the lectures, we've got further reading of places that you can look. Of all the classes in the entire quarter, this, for many people, might be a really good one to look at the suggested readings. We have several readings, which are sort of shorter tutorials and reviews of the kind of matrix calculus and linear algebra that we need for this class. So really encourage you to look at those. If you decide that one is your favorite, you can tell us on Ed which one you think is the best one to choose between them. I kind of like the one that's first on the list, but maybe you'll feel differently. Yeah. Conversely, yeah, so today will be all math and then Thursday will be all language and linguistics. Some people find the language and linguistics hard, as well, so I guess different kinds of people. OK, so getting straight into it. So where we started last time, I'd shown these baby neural networks and sort of said, well, we can think of each of those orange things as basically a little logistic regression unit. And the crucial difference from then the kind of statistics machine learning you see in the stats class, 109 or wherever, is that in those, you have one logistic regression, and you're defining the input features to it, and you've got some decision variable that you want to have at the output. Here, you're building these cascades of little logistic regressions. And so the idea is right at the end, we're going to define what we want. We're going to capture that by our objective function or loss function. But for the stuff in the middle, that stuff in the middle is going to be a chance for the neural network to learn by itself what would be useful inputs to further downstream neurons. What kind of functions should I come up with in terms of my inputs that will help me provide useful outputs to help the final computation down the track? And if you haven't seen and thought about this much before, I mean, I think it's worth sitting with that idea for a moment because this is really a super powerful idea, which is what's made neural networks more powerful in most circumstances than other forms of machine learning. The fact that you have this self-organization of intermediate levels of representation that you use to compute things that will be useful downstream for what you eventually want to do. The other reason I bring back up this picture is I've wanted to go straight from here to matrices. So while you could wire together neurons however you wanted to, and arguably, if you look at human brains, they look more like neurons wired together however you wanted to, but for what's done with neural networks, basically, there's always this kind of regular structure of layers. So once we have this regular structure of layers, we are taking the output of one of our neurons at one layer, and we're feeding them together with weights to produce the inputs to the next layer. So we're taking the x1, x2, x3 outputs. We're multiplying them all by weights. We're adding a bias term. And then we're going to put it through a nonlinearity, and that will give us the value at the next layer. So if we then collapse that to a vector and this to a vector, that then collapses into a computation that, first of all, we're doing a matrix multiplication. We're calculating Wx of the inputs, and then we're adding on the biases as a vector of biases, which gives us this intermediate value, z. And then we have this nonlinearity or activation function, which is applied to that, which gives us the values in the next layer of the neural network. And the activation function is applied to a vector and produces a vector, but it's operating on each of the individual components of that vector one at a time. So we've got some scalar function that we're just applying to each element of the vector. And so that's the kind of picture we saw when I did this example, and I'm going to continue to use this example in today's class. Remember, we were going to decide whether the word in the middle of the input window was a location or not. And so we were doing the matrix multiplication, putting it through the nonlinearity. We then are just doing a dot product here, and then we're going-- that got stuck into a sigmoid to predict yes or no. And the final thing I wanted to say a little bit about is these f's, the nonlinearity or the activation function. Where do they come in? Well, the starting point of where they came in the history of neural networks is when people came up with this idea that, well, you could represent the operation of a basic neuron by doing a matrix multiplication of the inputs and then having a bias term, or here, it represents a threshold term, to see whether the neurons should fire or not. That was actually in the very first implementation, which dates back to the 1940s. It was done as a threshold so that if the activation was greater than theta, you output 1, otherwise, you output 0. And well, if you have a threshold, the two lines are flat, right? So there is no slope, there is no gradient. So that actually makes learning much harder. So the whole secret of what we build with neural networks, and in particular, an alternative name that's popular in some circles these days, is gradient-based learning. And the entire idea of gradient-based learning is if we actually have some slopes, then it's like going skiing during spring break. You can work out where it's steeper, and you can head down where it's steeper, and that will allow us to optimize our function to learn much more quickly. And so that's one reason that we don't just want to have threshold units. We want to have things with slopes, so we have gradients. So in subsequent work, people started using activation functions with slopes. And so the first popular one was this sigmoid or logistic that we've seen from mapping to probabilities. But it's sort of imperfect, it seems, because the output was always non-negative. So that sort of tends to push things towards bigger numbers. So there was quite a bit of use, then, of this tanh function, and you'll actually see tanh. When we do assignment three, we'll be using tanh as in our current neural networks. And so I've written there the formula I usually give for tanh in terms of exponentials. Yeah, if your math is rusty, it's not obvious that tanh and logistic have much to do with each other, but if you want to treat this as a math problem, that a tanh is literally just a rescaled logistic. You're stretching it by 2 and moving it down by 1. It's the same function. OK, so that's nice, but if you're calculating tanh's, you have to do all of these exponentials, and exponentials are kind of slow on your computer and things like that. You might wonder whether you couldn't get away with something much cheaper. And so people thought about that and thought, maybe we could just use a so-called hard tanh, where it has a slope of 1 in the middle and is then just flat outside that area. And that seemed to work in many cases. And so that then led to the popularity of the rectified linear unit. So the rectified linear unit is simply 0 in the negative region and then is y equals x in the positive region. Now, this seems kind of wonky and goes against what I was saying about gradient-based learning because once you're in the negative region, there's no gradient. You're just dead. But in the positive region, there is gradient, and the gradient is particularly simple, right? The slope is always 1. And so this still feels slightly perverse to me, but this really became the norm of what people use for a number of years because people found that although for an individual neuron, it was dead half the time. Any time it went negative, that, overall, for your neural networks, some things would be alive. So it kind of gave a form of specialization. And the fact that the slope was always 1 meant that you got really easy, productive, backward flow of gradients in a way we'll talk about later. And so learning with ReLU turned out to be very effective, and people started using the ReLU nonlinearity everywhere, and it sort of became the default in the norm. And you'll see us using it in the assignments. In particular, we use it in assignment two, and so you'll get to see that it works. But nevertheless, at some point, people sort of had second thoughts and decided, having it dead over half of its range maybe isn't such a good idea after all, even though it seemed to work great for a few years. And so a lot of what's happened since then is then to come up with other functions which are, in some sense, ReLU-like, but not actually dead. OK, I don't really-- Yeah, here we go. So one version of that is the so-called leaky ReLU. So for the leaky ReLU, you make the negative half a straight line, as well, with a very minor slope. But still, it's got a little bit of slope. There is then a variant of that called the parametric ReLU, where you have one extra parameter, which is actually what the slope of the negative part is, and people showed some positive results with that. More recently, again, and this is what you often see in recent transformer models, is you see nonlinearities like swish and jello. So both of these are fancy functions, but kind of what they both look like is basically, this is y equals x to all intents and purposes, not quite, but approximately. And then you've got some funky bit of curve down here, which, again, gives you a bit of slope. The curve is going the opposite way. That's a bit funny, but they seem to work well, commonly used in recent transformer models. So that's a bit of a dump of all the nonlinearities people use. I mean, the details of that aren't super important right now. But the important thing to have in your head is, why do we need nonlinearities? And the way to think about that is that what we're doing with neural networks is function approximation. There's some very complex function that we want to learn, like maybe we want to go from a piece of text to its meaning, or we want to be interpreting visual scenes or something like that. And so we want to build really good function approximators. And well, if you're just doing matrix multiplies, a matrix multiply of a vector is a linear transform. So that doesn't let you multiply complex functions. I guess strictly, if you put a bias on the end, it's then an affine transform, but let's keep it simple. Linear transforms, right? So if you're doing multiple matrix multiplies, you're doing multiple linear transforms. But they compose, so you could have just multiplied these two matrices together, and you would have a single linear transform. So you get no power in terms of representation by having multilayer networks that are just matrix multiplies. As a little aside, in terms of representational power, having multilayer matrix multiplies gives you no power. But if you think about it in terms of learning, actually, it does give you some power. So in the theoretical community, looking at neural networks, there are actually quite a few papers that look at linear neural networks, meaning that they're just sequences of the multiplies with no nonlinearities because they have interesting learning properties, even though they give you no representational power. OK, but we'd like to be able to learn functions like this, not only functions like this. And to be able to learn functions like this, we need more than linear transforms. And we achieve those by having something that makes us be calculating a nonlinear function. And it's these activation functions that give us nonlinear functions. OK, cool. OK, so then getting on to today. So the whole thing we want to do now is gradient-based learning. This is our stochastic gradient descent equation, where here, that upside down triangle symbol, that's our gradient. We're wanting to work out the slope of our objective function. And so this is how we're going to learn, by calculating gradients. So what we want to know is, how do we calculate the gradients for an arbitrary function? And so what I want to do today is, first of all, do this by hand for math and then discuss, how do we do it computationally? Which is effectively the famous thing that's taken as powering under powering all of neural nets, which is the back propagation algorithm. But the back propagation algorithm is just automating the math. OK. And so for the math, it's matrix calculus. And at this point, then there's a huge spectrum between people who know much more math than me and people who barely ever learnt this. But I hope to explain the essentials or remind people of them enough that you're at least at a starting point for reading some other stuff and doing homework two. So let's get into that. And so I'm going to spend about half the time on those two halves. And the hope is that after this, you'll feel like, I actually understand how neural networks work under the hood, fingers crossed. OK, so here we go. So if you're a Stanford student, you maybe did math 51, or else you could have done math 51, which teaches linear algebra, multivariate calculus, and modern applications. Math 51 covers everything I'm going to talk about and way more stuff. So if you actually know that and remember it, you can look at Instagram for the next 35 minutes. But I think the problem is that quite apart from the fact a lot of people do it as frosh, this is a lot to get through in 10 weeks. And I think that a lot of the people who do this class, by 2 years later, don't really have much ability to use any of it. But if you actually looked at this book really hard and for a very, really long time, you would have discovered that actually, right towards the end of the book in appendix G, there's actually an appendix on neural networks and the multivariable chain rule, which is precisely what we're going to be using for doing our neural networks. But there are only two problems. One problem is that this is page 697 of the book, and I'm not sure anyone ever gets that far. And the other problem is, even if you do get that far, I don't know. I find these pages that they're really dense, texty pages. It's not even easy to understand them if you have gone there. So here's my attempt on that. So the mantra to have in your head is, gee, if I can remember basic single variable calculus, that I've got 3x squared and the derivative of that is 6x, that's all you need to know. The mantra is multivariable calculus is just like single variable calculus, except you're using matrices. OK, so that's our article of faith, and we're going to do that. And so what we're wanting to do is to do matrix calculus on the generalization of that tensor calculus, using vectors, matrices, and higher order tensors, because if we can do things and what's referred to as vectorized gradients in the neural network world, that that will be the fast, efficient way to do our operations. So if you want to think it all through, you can do it single variable at a time and check that you're doing the right thing. And I sort of tried to indicate that in the first lecture. But if we want to have our networks go vroom, we want to be doing matrix calculus. OK, so let's work up to doing that. OK, so this is the part that I trust everyone can remember, right? So we have f of x equals x cubed, and we can do single variable derivative, and the derivative is 3x squared. Everyone remember that one? OK. That's something we can all start from. And remember, this derivative is saying the slope of things, right? So the slope of things lets us work out, where is something steep? So we'll be able to go skiing. That's our goal, right? And so you can think of the slope of things as how much the output will change if we change the input a bit, right? That's our measure of steepness. So since the derivative is 3x squared, if we're at x equals 1, that means the slope is about three times 1 squared 3. So if I work out the value of the function for 1.01, it's gone up by about three times. I move the x by 0.01 and the output move by 0.03, where if I go to x equals 4, the derivative is 3 times 4 squared is 48. And so if I work out the value of the function at 4.01, I get approximately 64.48 versus 64. That small difference from 4 to 4.01 has been magnified 48 times in the output. OK, so now, we just remember the mantra. It's going to be exactly the same as single-value calculus, but with more stuff. So if we have a function with n inputs, we're then going to work out its gradient, which is its partial derivative with respect to each input. So its gradient will now be a vector of the same size as the number of inputs. And there's this funky symbol, which people pronounce various ways. I mean, this kind of originated as some kind of someone's weird way of drawing a calligraphic D, right? So it is really a D. So I think call mainly just call it D, but sometimes, people call it partial or funky D or some other name, right? So you have df/dx1, df/dx2 for each of the variables. OK, so if we go beyond that and then have a function with n inputs and m outputs, what we then get for the gradient is what's referred to as the Jacobian. Now, actually, the dude this is named after was a German Jew, so it should really be Jacobi. But no one says that in this country, Jacobian. OK, so the Jacobian is then a matrix of partial derivatives, where you're working out, for each output and each input, the partial derivative between the component of the input and the output. So this looks like the kind of thing that we're going to have when we have a neural network layer because we're going to have n inputs and m outputs for the two layers of our neural network. So we'll be using these kind of Jacobians. OK, so then the whole idea of neural networks is we've got these multilevel computations, and they're going to correspond to composition of functions. So we need to know how to compose things, both for calculating functions and for calculating their gradients. So if we have a one variable function, and we want to work out its derivative in terms of a composition of two functions, what we're doing is multiplying our computations. OK, so if you compose together z of y, that's the function that we did at the beginning, that gives you-- was i
