### Lecture 2 - Word Vectors and Language Models

OK, I should try and get started. So what we're going to do today is we're going to try and do everything else that you need to know about word vectors and start to learn a teeny bit about neural nets. And then we'll get much further into doing more with the math of neural nets next week. So this is the general plan. So I'm going to finish up from where I was last time with optimization basics, then look a little bit more about word2vec and word vectors, and then some of the variants of word2vec. And then I'm going to briefly consider alternatives, sort of like what can you get from just counting words in different ways. Then we're going to go on and talk a little bit about the evaluation of word vectors, the topic of word senses that already came up a couple of times last time when people were asking questions, and then towards the end, start to introduce the idea of classification, doing neural classification, and what neural networks are about, which is something that we'll then expand on more in the second week. Before I get into that, just notes on course organization. So remember, the first assignment is already out and it's due before class next Tuesday. So then our Python review session is going to be taught this Friday 3:30 to 4:20. It's not going to be taught here. It's going to be taught in gates B01, the gates basement. I encourage everyone again to come to office hours and help sessions. They've already started. They're listed on the website. We're having these sort of offers our help sessions in classrooms with multiple TAs. So just turn up if you're on campus and you can be helped. And if you are on campus, we'd like you to just turn up. Though we do also have a Zoom option for Stanford Online students. And finally, I have office hours, which I have not yet opened, but I will open sometime tonight. They're going to be on Monday afternoons. Now obviously, given the number of people, not everyone can make it into my office hours. And I'm going to do these by appointment. So they're by 15 minute appointments on Calendly. But I'm very happy to talk to some people. And I put this little note at the end saying, don't hog the slots. Some people think it would be a really good idea if they really work out how to sign up every week for an office hour session with me. And that's of a little bit anti-social. So think about that. So at the end of last time, I did a sort of bad job of trying to write on slides of working out the derivatives of word2vec. And hopefully, you could read it much more clearly in the version that appears on the website where I was doing it at home more carefully. So that was saying that we had this loss function, and our job was to work out its derivatives, which would tell us which direction to go to walk downhill. And so I didn't really quite finish the loop here. So we have some cost function that we want to minimize. And then we work out the gradient of that function to work out which direction is downhill. And then the simplest algorithm is then that we work out the direction downhill, we walk a little bit in that direction, and then we repeat. We work out the gradient at this point, we walk downhill a little bit, and we keep on going, and we'll get to the minimum. And with a sort of a one dimensional function like this, it's very simple. We're just walking downhill. But when we have a function of many, many dimensions, when we calculate the gradient at different points, we might be starting to walk in different directions. And so that's why we need to do calculus and have gradients. And so this gives us the basic algorithm of gradient descent. And so under the gradient descent algorithm, what we're doing is that we've got our loss function J. We're working out its gradient. And then we're taking a little multiplier of the gradient. So that alpha is our step size or learning rate. And that's normally alpha is a very small number, something like 10 to the minus 3 or 10 to the minus 4 or maybe even 10 to the minus 5. So we're taking a really little bit of the gradient, and then we're subtracting it from our parameters to get new parameters. And as we do that, we will walk downhill. And the reason why we want to have a small learning rate is we don't want to walk too far. So if from here, we worked out the gradient and said, it's in this direction, and we just kept on walking. We might end up way over here. Or if we had a really big step size, we might even end up at a worse point than we started with. So we want to take little steps to walk downhill. And so that's the very basic gradient descent algorithm. Now the very basic gradient descent algorithm we never use. What we actually use is the next thing up, which is called stochastic gradient descent. So the problem is for the basic gradient descent algorithm, we've worked out, for an entire set of data, what the objective function is and what the slope at the point of evaluation is. And in general, we've got a lot of data in which we're computing models. So simply trying to calculate our objective function over all of our data for our model, the training data for the model, would take us a very, very long time. And so that's very expensive to compute. And so we'd wait a very long time before we make even a single step of gradient update. So for neural nets, what you're always doing is using this variant that's called stochastic gradient descent. And so for stochastic gradient descent, what that means is we pick a very small subset of our data, like maybe we pick 16 or 32 data items, and we pretend that's all of our data, and we evaluate the function J based on that small subset and work out the gradient based on that small subset. So it's a noisy, inaccurate estimate of the gradient. And we use that to be the direction in which we walk. So that's normally referred to also as having mini batches or mini batch gradient descent. And in theory, working out the gradient based on this small subset is an approximation. But one of the interesting things in the way things have emerged in neural network land is it turns out that neural networks actually often work better when you throw some noise into the system that having this noise in the system gives you jiggle and moves things around. And so, actually, stochastic gradient descent not only is way, way, way faster, but actually works better as a system for optimization of neural networks. So if you remember from last time for word2vec, the idea was we started by just saying each word has a random vector representing it. So we will literally sort of just get random small numbers and fill up the vectors with those random small numbers. There's an important point there, which is you do have to initialize your vectors with random small numbers. If you just leave all the vectors as 0, then nothing works. And that's because if everything starts off the same, you get these false symmetries, which means that you can't learn. So you always do want to be initializing your vectors with random numbers. And then we're going to go through each position in the corpus. Using our estimates, we're going to try and predict the probability of words in the context as we talked about last time. So that gives us an objective function from which we can then look at our errors, look at our gradient, and update the vectors so that they learn to predict surrounding words better. And so the incredible thing is that we can do no more than that, and we end up learning word vectors, which actually capture quite a lot of the semantics, the meaning and relationships between different words. So, when this was first discovered for these algorithms, I mean, it really feels like magic that you can just do this simple math over a lot of text and actually learn about the meanings of words that it's just so surprising that something so simple could work. But as time has gone on, this same recipe has then been for all kinds of learning about the behavior of language from neural networks. So let's just go through a sense of how that is. But before we do that, so let me just mention-- so for our word2vec algorithms, the only parameters of the model are these word vectors. They're the outside word vectors and the center word vectors, which we actually treat as disjoint, as I mentioned last time. And when we do the computations, we're considering the dot product between the various possible outside words with our center word, and we're using those to get a probability distribution over how likely the model thinks that different outside words were. And then we're comparing that to the actual outside word in the context. And that gives us our source of error. So as such, this is what's referred to in NLP as a bag of words model, that it doesn't actually know about the structure of sentences or even what's to the left and what's to the right. It's predicting exactly the same probabilities at each position to the left or right, but it's wanting to know about what kind of words appear in the context of the center word. So I just wanted to stop this for a minute and-- let's see, not that one. So let's give you some kind of a sense that this really does work. So this is a little Jupyter Notebook that I've got for this. And here, I'm using a package gensim which we don't continue to use after that really. But it's one package that lets you load and play with word vectors. And the word vectors I'm going to use here are glove word vectors. And actually, glove was a model we built at Stanford. And I'm going to actually talk about it a little bit later. So strictly speaking, these aren't exactly word for word vectors, but they behave in exactly the same way. So now it's loaded up my word vectors because the word vectors are a big data file. And so as we've discussed, for a word that the representation of any word-- here's bread is just a vector of real numbers. So I'm using 100 dimensional word vectors to keep things quicker for my class demo. So this is the word bread. And then I can say, well, what's the representation for croissant. And this is croissant. And we can get a visual sense of they're at least a little bit similar. So the first components are both negative, the second components are both positive, the third components are both negative and large, the fourth components are both positive. They seem like they're kind of similar vectors. So that seems kind of hopeful because that means that it knows that bread and croissant are a bit similar to each other. This package has a nice simple function where rather than doing that by hand, you can just ask it about all the word vectors and say which ones are most similar. So I can ask it what words in its vocabulary are most similar to USA. And in this model, everything's been lowercased, I should mention. And so if I do that, it has Canada, America, U.S.A, then United States, Australia. Well, those seem a fairly reasonable list of most similar words, though you might think it's a little strange that Canada wins out over the USA with dots over it. Similarly, I can ask it what's most similar to banana. And I get coconut, mango, bananas, potato, pineapple, fruit, et cetera. Again, pretty sensible. A little bit of a bias to more tropical fruits. Or I can go to croissant and ask what's the most similar to croissant. The most similar things to croissant isn't bread, but it's things like brioche, baguette, focaccia, which sort of basically makes sense though he is putting here. And I've got-- wait, I'd already done-- oh, sorry. Yeah, I remember what this is. So with this most similar, you've got a positive word vector and you're saying, what other words are most similar in position to that. There's something else you can do, which you can say is this is let me take the negative of that word vector and say what's most similar to the negative of it. And you could possibly think, oh, that might be useful to find antonyms or something like that. I mean, the truth is, it isn't. If you ask for the things that are most similar to the negative of the banana vector-- and in most other vectors, it's the same-- you get off out these weirdo things that you're not really sure if they're words at all, or maybe they are in some other language. Or some of them are names-- like Shunichi is a Japanese name-- but not very useful stuff. They don't really feel like a negative of banana. But it turns out that from there, we get to this powerful ability of-- there was observed for word2vec, which is that we could isolate semantic components and then put them together in interesting ways. So looking at this picture, what we could do is start with a positive vector for King, from the origin up the King, then we could use the negation to say subtract out the vector for man. And then we could have another positive vector of add on the vector for woman. And then we can ask the model is if you're over here in the space, what is the nearest word to you over there. And so that's what this next thing does. It sort of says, positive vector for King, negative for man, also positive for Queen, where does that get you to. And that gets you to Queen. Yay! And so this was the most celebrated property that was discovered with these word vectors that they weren't only good for meaning similarity, but that they were good for doing these kind of meaning components. And these got referred to as analogies because you can think of them as A is B is C is to what. So it's sort of like woman is to King-- no, sorry. Man is to King or King is to man as-- I'm saying this the wrong way around. Man is to King as woman is to what in the analogies. And so here, I've defined a little function that is now saying this little function just automates that and will compute analogies. And so now, I can ask it in just this analogy format, man is to King as woman is to Queen. And that one was the canonical example. But you can actually sort of have fun with this. And I mean, this is pretty old fashioned stuff. I feel like I'm, maybe like now at this point, an old guy talking about how much fun we used to have sitting around the radio, listening to radio plays because basically no one uses this stuff anymore. And there are much, much better and fancier things like ChatGPT. But back in the day, when I was younger, it was really stunning already just how this very simple model built on very simple data could just have quite good semantic understanding and do quite good analogies. So you can actually play with this quite a bit and have a bit of fun. So you can do something like analogy, Australia comma beer France. What do people think the answer will be? Wine. Close. The answer gives us champagne, but that seems a pretty good answer. I could then put in Russia. What do people think-- Vodka! Yeah, it'll see. It can get back vodka. This is actually works kind of interestingly. I could do a different one. I can test something different. I can do something like pencil is to sketching as camera is to-- photographing. Yeah, that works quite well. So we built this model in 2014. So it's a little bit out of date in politics. So we can't do the last decade of politics, which is maybe unfortunate. But we could try out older politics questions. So we could try Obama is to Clinton as Reagan is to-- if you remember your US World history class, any guesses what it's going to say? There's a Bush one. Any other ideas? Some people have different opinions of Bill Clinton? Any-- What it answers is Nixon, which I think is actually kind of fair. You can also get it to do some just sort of language syntactic facts. So you can do something like tall is to tallest as long-- oops-- as long is to-- this one's easy. Yeah, so with this simple method of learning, with this simple bag of words model, it's enough to learn a lot about the semantics of words and stuff that's beyond conventional semantics like our examples with Australia is to beer as Russia is to vodka. I mean, that's sort of cultural world knowledge, which goes a little bit beyond what people normally think of as word meaning semantics, but it's also in there. Yes. If you perhaps subtract the distance from, let's say like man and King, does that also capture a concept of relationship between two words? Would that give you back ruler or something like that, where taking the distance-- the difference between two vectors does capture some concept [INAUDIBLE] The distance between man-- so man compared to King should be a ruler concept. But isn't that what I'm using? Because then I'm taking the distance between man and King is what I'm adding on to woman to get to Queen, right? Yeah. So if you think of these words, depending on which thing you think of as the analogy, you can think of it-- you've both got a vector, a difference vector between words that gives you a gender analogy and one that gives you a ruler analogy. Yeah, absolutely. Any other questions? Yeah. In the word2vec algorithm, we get two vectors for each word, a U and a V. But here, you only have one vector. So how do you go from two to one. Yeah, good question. I mean, the commonest way in practice was you just average the two of them. And really, you find out that they end up very close, because if you think of it, since you're going along every position of the text, you're both going to be the case where if the text is the octopus has legs-- you're going to have octopus in the center with legs in the context, and a couple of time steps later, it's going to be legs in the center with octopus in the context. So although they vary a bit for all the regions of the neural nets vary, basically they end up very similar and people normally just average them. Yeah. Can you nest this process-- So use this-- the answer of one to then be placed into the analogy function of another, and see how far away you can go before it starts to break down? I think you can. So you're wanting to-- How distant a relation between two words can you do before it starts providing incorrect relationships between words? Are you wanting to make two steps from somewhere or-- Yeah, two steps or three steps or how far-- how many steps can you go away from King before it starts failing? So it doesn't always work. I mean, there are certainly examples that are fail. I'm sort of shy to try that now because I don't have a predefined function that did it, and that might take me too long. But you could play with it at home and see how it works for you. Curious, as the qualification, why is it that we use two separate sets of vectors for word2vec? Is it just to get more parameters, or is there [INAUDIBLE]? I'll get back to that. Maybe I should go on at this point. Let me move on and kind just get through some more details of the word2vec algorithm. So just a technical point on this class so you don't make any big mistakes and waste your weekend. I mean, for most instances of 224N we've actually had people implement from scratch word2vec as assignment 2. But for this quarter, doing it in spring quarter-- as you probably know, spring quarter is actually a little shorter than the other two quarters-- we decided to skip having people implement word2vec. So don't look at the old assignment 2 that says, implement word2vec, or else you'll be spending your time. Wait for the newest assignment 2 to come out. But despite that, let me just say a little bit more about some of the details. So why two vectors? So the two vectors is it just makes the math a little bit easier. So if you think about the math, if you have the same vectors for the center word and for the outside words, well, for whatever the center word is, let's say it's octopus, that when you're going through the trying out every possible context word for the normalization, at some point, you'll hit octopus again. And so at that point, you'll have a quadratic term. You'll have the x squared of the octopus vector. And that kind of messes up-- I mean you're clev
